---
title: "Culture is about the small things"
date: 2023-09-14T11:43:00+01:00
categories:
 - personal
 - work
---

I have lived outside the country I was born in for more than 17 years now.

When I lived in France, I eventually had a pretty good grasp of the language. I
could give tech talks, write reports, talk to my coworkers, neighbours and
friends — including casual banter and that sort of thing. I like to think that
I actually fit in pretty well.

However, one evening I watched *Qui veut gagner des millons?* on TV, the French
edition of *Who wants to be a Millionaire*. And I realized that I would not
even be able to get through the initial round of quick-fire questions. Most of
the time, I did not know the answer to the 500 euro question! The reason for
that is that these questions rely on shared cultural understandings, such as
that TV series everyone watched when they were a kid, popular books and snacks
and the like. I grew up with different series. I have not watched many of the
movies that "everyone" remembers from way back when, such as *La cité de la
peur* or *Le Père-Noël est une ordure*. *La classe Américaine* was excellent
though :)

# Don’t assume cultural context when communicating

It is easy to take your own cultural context for granted. I see this all the
time on the Internet, or at work. Yet, in a globalized world, this creates an
exclusionary atmosphere, particularly together with a "What, you don’t know
that? Come on!" reaction when this gets pointed out.

In my opinion, this is especially true for US culture. People keep showing me
pictures of outrageously bad pop tarts, and I don’t know what a normal one is
supposed to look like. People assume that I know who the cartoon character in
their avatar is. And so on. Europeans generally don’t know these things, as
they are not available in their country. I assume it’s the same for Asian
people.

This goes in the other direction too, of course. There was a recent controversy
on social media because an American influencer in Paris apparently discovered
that French people put butter on their sandwiches. There was a lot of snark
from other Europeans about how everyone knows this already and that this person
was stupid, etc.

So, my tip for communicating (and writing docs or blog posts is certainly a
form of communication too): **Try to be mindful of your own cultural context
that might not be shared by your readers or listeners.** Don’t rely on it. And
when you are called out for it, don’t double down and give a snarky answer.
Be kind.

