---
title: "Over to Mastodon, I guess"
date: 2022-11-19T11:11:37+01:00
categories:
 - Fediverse
 - personal
---
It took me quite a while to realize that I have been here before.

When Google+ (the greatest social network I have used, by the way) was killed,
somebody spun up **Pluspora** as a refuge. It was a Pod of something called
[diaspora](https://diasporafoundation.org). It was nice in the beginning, then
gradually I interacted with it less -- since, TBH, there wasn't much content,
and I also didn't post much. Eventually, the person running the Pod died, and
their family ended up switching it off.

So when *that guy* bought Twitter and proceeded to run it into the ground at
unprecedented speed, the number of Twitter postings saying "find me on
Mastodon @x@y.z" multiplied on my timeline. 

Also, at work, we occasionally had a moment where we all shared our gratitude
not to work for Twitter. But I digress.

Being a NetBSD dev, it seemed natural to me to register an account on
[mastodon.sdf.org](https://mastodon.sdf.org). SDF was founded as a Public Unix
System, giving out free shell accounts to people. They have been running on
NetBSD for many years and form a valuable part of the NetBSD community.

The beginning was rough: The SDF Mastodon server had surpassed 15,000 users,
just days after breaking through the 10,000 mark. Service was slow, there were
lots of errors, and it was generally not super pleasant. However, within a few
days, the SDF admins started adding a LOT more hardware to the service, and
these days, latency and functionality are top-notch. I think instead of paying
$8 for a blue checkmark, that money is better spent with a recurring SDF
donation!

## The Fediverse

I alluded to this earlier, but diaspora and Mastodon are part of *the
Fediverse*, so they *federate*. Just like in email, you can follow people from
other servers, even using different software. For instance, Mastodon has a
500-character limit for posts, but you could follow someone using
[Plume](https://joinplu.me) for blogging, and their full blog posts would
appear right on your timeline. Or I suppose you could follow someone's
[PeerTube](https://joinpeertube.org) channel and have their videos appear on
your timeline.

This is also how I eventually realized "Mastodon" and "diaspora" are really
the same network: in the federated (global) timeline, a number of bots and
people I already knew appeared.

## Coming over

If you are looking to come over to Mastodon, you probably want to do the
following things:

1. Create an account on some server. It's nice if you like the "theme" or the
   other people on the same server, since then you can look at the list of all
   public local posts when you are looking for something to read.
2. Add your new address to your Twitter account -- name, bio, link, all are
   fine.
3. Head over to https://fedifinder.glitch.me and let it find the Fediverse
   accounts for all the folks you follow on Twitter. You can download a CSV
   and import it in the Mastodon settings page, making you follow everyone
   automatically.

## Side note

diaspora still exists. Hilariously, if you follow the "Sign up now!" link on
their homepage, you eventually arrive at
https://diaspora.fediverse.observer/go&software=diaspora, which lists ... no
open Pods for signup.
